GENAD review comments (#143)
anima-wg/voucher: draft-ietf-anima-rfc8366bis.md

For Vouchers stored/transferred via methods like a USB storage device (USB key), the Voucher format is usually signaled by a filename extension.

> As explained in {{RFC8995, Section 2.5}}, the Pledge is a creation of the manufacturer, and thus manufacturer (in the form of the Manufacturer Authorized Signing Authority (MASA)) has knowledge of the capabilities of the Pledge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As explained in {{RFC8995, Section 2.5}}, the Pledge is a creation of the manufacturer, and thus the manufacturer (in the form of the Manufacturer Authorized Signing Authority (MASA)) has knowledge of the capabilities of the Pledge.
```

> Specifically, the manufacturer knows what signature algoritms the Pledge is doing to use, and can verify, thus there is no need (or opportunity) to negotiate the algorithm  or signature (CMS, JWS, COSE) scheme.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifically, the manufacturer knows what signature algoritm the Pledge is going to use, and can verify this, thus there is no need (or opportunity) to negotiate the algorithm or signature (CMS, JWS, COSE) scheme.
```

Nor is there any need for a mandatory to implement (MTI) scheme, as again, by (literal) construction, the manufacturer knows what has been implemented.

> In constrained situations, the Pledge is expected to only have code space for a single algorithm and signature scheme

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In constrained-device situations, the Pledge is expected to only have code space for a single algorithm and signature scheme.
```

A manufacturer may transition devices among different algorithms, transitioning to quantum-safe ones as they become standardized, according to their own schedule.

The only device for which this approach is a challenge is for the Domain Registrar.

> That device must deal with all variants which are still relevant to the operation of the specific network.

Reviewer: Since we talked about algorithms and not variants, we should try to use that word to refer to it:

```suggestion
That device must deal with all algorithms which are still relevant to the operation of the specific network.
```

Note: this CAN include support for algorithms which may be considered no longer safe, as there may be devices (spares) in unopened boxes which have not yet been used.
The onboarding (bootstrap) process is a short-duration process, and it will often be the case that once onboarded, the device will be upgraded to newer firmware, with support for better/smaller/safer algorithms.
Both {{RFC8995}} and {{SZTP}} provide mechanisms by which new (stronger) operational identities can be provisioned.

> When designing Pledge devices, manufacturers choose algorithms and signature formats that they need to support in their MASA.

Reviewer: I'm no expert on that vs which grammar, and it can be changed back of course, however some form of hyphen or ";" character is needed to ensure that we say what we want to say (I think).  First, an algorithm/format for the Pledge is chosen - device design.
Then after that, it's ensured that the MASA also supports that particular algo/format.  The old sentence suggested kind of the reverse, or only a focus on the MASA, which wasn't intended I think.

```suggestion
When designing Pledge devices, manufacturers choose algorithms and signature formats - which they also need to support in their MASA.
```

Should a manufacturer decide to stop supporting some algorithm, they will likely need to recall any inventory that exists in warehouses or within the supply chain in order to replace the firmware and update the IDevID certificates present.

While non-constrained devices could have code space for multiple algorithms or signature schemes, it makes little sense to use anything but the strongest of the algorithms present.

> Constrained devices are able to dispense with much code involved in ASN.1/PKIX processing of the voucher and voucher-request.  This is explained in {{cBRSKI}}.

Reviewer: This statement seems (to me) only loosely related to what comes next. So this is saying that because we drop CMS in cBRSKI, we can get rid of CMS code (which is ASN.1 based)?

Or does this solely refer to replacing any pinned domains or "proximity registrar identity" by a shorter version? In the latter case, most of the related code (ASN.1) that handles these functions may still be needed; we don't have a way in cBRSKI to get rid of cert-chaining checks alltogether.
For example, when connecting to an EST server, that server may identify itself with a chain of certs that the IoT device needs to verify against its domain CA trust anchor.

Rather, we could just say here that cBRSKI needs shorter/smaller vouchers, and voucher requests - i.e. smaller data sizes. This alone would be motivation for all these new attributes.

Author: You are not wrong, so what do I say here: the goal is to make it clear that a device using pubk/pubk-sha256 probably does not even have code to parse/process cert, so the conflict can't even be detected...

> The attributes `pinned-domain-pubk` (`proximity-registrar-pubk` for requests) and `pinned-domain-pubk-sha256` (`proximity-registrar-pubk-sha256` for requests) are involved in the process of pinning a raw public key for such devices.

Reviewer: looks ok to me but I just realized/found that we define "pinning" in section 1, but not in section 2 where a reader might expect it also. (Just FYI - might be handy to have it in the terminology section 2 also, since "pinning" did give rise to some confusion/objections before for readers with certain backgrounds, like perhaps PKIX background)

The public keys are to be encoded according to {{!RFC7250, Section 3}} for RSA and EcDSA keys, noting that {{!RFC8032}} extends this to include an OID for EdDSA.
The old (1024-bit) DSA algorithm is not supported.

> In order to partially alleviate how many variations a Registrar implementation need deal with, some RECOMMENDATIONS are as follows:

Reviewer: this looks like normative language in all-caps, but it isn't (confusing).   Official term is "RECOMMENDED" or "SHOULD".

Author: So lower case it and leave the SHOULDs below?

> In order to partially alleviate how many variations a Registrar implementation need deal with, some RECOMMENDATIONS are as follows:

Author: ```suggestion
In order to partially alleviate how many variations a Registrar implementation need deal with, these are recommendations for implementers of Registrar:
```

When EcDSA is supported, curves secp256r1 and secp384r1 SHOULD be supported.
When EdDSA is supported, curves Ed25519 and Ed448 SHOULD be supported.
When RSA is supported, key lengths between 2048 and 4096 bits SHOULD be supported.
{{?I-D.ietf-lamps-pq-composite-sigs}} with {{?I-D.ietf-lamps-cms-composite-sigs}} SHOULD be supported for CMS wrapped vouchers.
{{!RFC9964}} SHOULD be supported for COSE signed vouchers.
{{?I-D.ietf-jose-pq-composite-sigs}} SHOULD be supported for JOSE signed vouchers.

The decision as to when to transition to quantum-safe algorithms is a manufacturer
decision.

> Choices outside of these RECOMMENDATIONS likely will result in Pledge devices being unable to onboard on some networks.

Reviewer: see above comment on 'RECOMMENDATIONS'

> Choices outside of these RECOMMENDATIONS likely will result in Pledge devices being unable to onboard on some networks.

Author: ```suggestion
Other choices are possible, but likely will result in Pledge devices being unable to onboard on networks until the Registrar involved implements those choices.
```

> In such a situation, an automated, zero-touch solution may be impossible, but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In such a situation, an automated, zero-touch onboarding solution may be impossible, but
```

>   Extension SID:
>   : the YANG module SID value that defines the extension per {{voucher-ext}}.

Note that the SID module value is allocated as part of a {{CORESID}} process.
This may be from a SID range managed by IANA, or from any other MegaRange.
{{?RFC9997}} allows for PEN based allocations.
IANA does not need to separately allocate a SID value for this column.

Extension name strings for IETF process (standards track, experimental, IRTF) documents are single words, given by the YANG Module Name: They do not contain dots.

For vendor proprietary extensions, (including ISE submissions), the resulting string still needs to be unique.

> This can be done by putting the extension name in the form a fully-qualified domain name (FQDN) {{?RFC3696}}, such as "fuubar.example.com"

Reviewer: This leads to a highly confusing end result: a just-below paragraph says that the name is always the YANG module name!!  Which isn't the case here.

> This can be done by putting the extension name in the form a fully-qualified domain name (FQDN) {{?RFC3696}}, such as "fuubar.example.com"

Author: ```suggestion
This can be done by making the YANG module unique, basing it on a fully-qualified domain name (FQDN) {{?RFC3696}}, such as "fuubar.example.com-mud-thing" rather than "fuubar-mud-thing"
```

Vendor proprietary extensions do not need to be registered with IANA, but vendors are encouraged to do so.

Designated Experts should review the documents for clarity, but the choices are tied to WG and IESG processes:

> * There are no choices in the extension names (which is always the YANG module name), or SID value (which is from another IANA process).

Author: ```suggestion
* There are no choices in the extension names (for standards track extensions) which is always the YANG module name), or SID value (which is from another IANA process).
```

> * For non-standards track extensions, the Designated Expert should review the provided document is provided for clarity of purpose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For non-standards track extensions, the Designated Expert should review the provided document for clarity of purpose.
```
